You’re a male firefly and it seems
you’re hitting it off with this female.
She’s sending you the right
signals back— but what’s this?
Suddenly, she’s lunging at you.
That’s not normal.
Let’s pause here to understand
what’s going on
and see if you'll make it out alive.
The first firefly is thought to have
lived over 100 million years ago,
illuminating the night
with a glowing green light.
And today, there are
around 2,000 firefly species,
found all over the world,
from forests and grasslands
to marshes and deserts.
All fireflies produce light
at some point in their lives.
They do this with a reaction-catalyzing
enzyme called luciferase
and a molecule called luciferin,
which undergoes a luminous transformation
when it interacts with oxygen.
Meanwhile, many firefly species
also produce unpleasant tasting,
toxic, defensive chemicals
like lucibufagins.
So it's thought that glowing
might help signal their toxicity
and deter predators from eating them.
Developing fireflies also light up
to varying degrees.
In fact, fireflies generally spend
just a few weeks in their adult bodies
and actually pass most
of their lives as larvae.
During this stage, many species are
highly active, fierce predators
that use venom to paralyze prey,
then externally liquefy
their victims with their saliva.
Immature fireflies also tend
to glow when they're disturbed.
When they finally become adults, their
light skills help dissuade predators—
but they're also usually
channeled towards mating.
There are some exceptions,
like so-called “dark” fireflies,
which are active during the day
and rely on pheromones
instead of light for courtship.
But how it goes in many cases
is that males fly around, flashing,
while females observe
until spotting the right one.
Different species display
different colors—
including reds, yellows,
greens, and blues—
all resulting from variation
in the luciferase enzyme’s structure.
They also flash in unique patterns,
from rapid flickers to sustained glows.
In some species,
males synchronize their flashing
once they reach great enough numbers,
resulting in grand displays
that help reduce visual clutter
for their female spectators.
And females of just about every species
are looking for something different.
Cattail flash-train firefly females,
for example, prefer faster flickers,
while ignited firefly females select
for longer light pulses.
Compared to males,
female fireflies tend to keep their
bioluminescent signals pretty simple.
Generally, an interested female
will point her lantern at a chosen male
and respond to his flashes,
drawing him in.
Successful matches may mate for hours,
attached at the abdomen.
But things don’t always go so smoothly,
which takes us back
to that conspicuous lunge.
Many fireflies don't even eat as adults,
instead channeling all the energy
they stored as larvae into finding mates.
But that's not the case
for the females of one genus of fireflies.
They are called femme fatales,
and they're predators that hunt
the adult males of other firefly species.
Despite being much larger,
femme fatales lure males by mimicking
the unique flashing patterns
the females of their species give off.
Then, instead of mating,
they attack and eat them.
But femme fatales are after more
than just nutritious snacks:
they lack their own natural toxins
and are able to sequester those of other
species when they consume them.
And this similarly helps make them
unappealing to would-be predators.
But the males they aim to prey on
seem to also have defense strategies.
One research team observed that males
often approached femme fatales
with caution and dodged attacks
by dropping several centimeters.
In fact, they estimated that less than 10%
of femme fatale hunts are successful.
Interestingly, this isn't the only
time firefly flashes are channeled
towards more deceptive means.
Certain Chinese orb-weaver spiders
have been observed to wrap fireflies
in their webs,
keeping them alive so they attract
others to the sticky trap.
The spiders even seem to make captured
males adopt female flashing patterns
in order to bait other males
on the search for a mate.
So, as a male firefly,
while the right bright signal could mean
the hard-fought promise of progeny,
it's best to beware of the treacherous
tricks light can play.